# Frequently asked questions

## What are the differences between rustic and restic?

- Written in Rust instead of golang
- Optimized for small resource usage (in particular memory usage, but also overall CPU usage)
- Philosophy of development (release new features early)
- New features (e.g. hot/cold repositories, lock-free pruning)
- Some commands or options act a bit different or have slightly different syntax

## Why is rustic written in Rust

Rust is a powerful language designed to build reliable and efficient software.
This is a very good fit for a backup tool.

## How does rustic work with cold storages like AWS Glacier?

If you want to use cold storage, make sure you always specify an extra repository `--repo-hot` which
contains the hot data. This repository acts like a cache for all metadata, i.e. config/key/snapshot/index
files and tree packs. As all commands except `restore` only need to access the metadata, they are fully
functional but only need the cold storage to list files while everything else is read from the "hot repo".
Note that the "hot repo" on its own is not a valid rustic repository. The "cold repo", however, contains
all files and is nothing but a standard rustic repository.

If you additionally use a cache, you effectively have a first level cache on your local disc and a second
level cache with the "hot repo". Note that the "hot repo" can be also a remote repo, so hot/cold repositories
also work for multiple rustic clients backing up to the same repository.

## How does the lock-free prune work?

Like the prune within restic, rustic decides for each pack whether to keep it, remove it or repack it.
Instead of removing packs, it however only marks the packs to remove in a separate index structure.
Packs which are marked for removal are checked if they are really not needed and have been marked
long enough ago. Depending on these checks they are either finally removed, recovered or kept in the
state of being marked for removal.

This two-phase deletion is needed for rustic to work lock-free: If a `backup` runs parallel to a `prune`
run (or `forget --prune`), it could be that prune decides that some blobs can be removed, but the parallel
backup uses these blobs for the newly generated snapshot.

The time to hold marked packs should be long enough to guarantee that a possibly parallel backup run has
finished in between. It can be set by the `--keep-delete` option and defaults to 23 hours. In any case, packs
will be kept marked and only deleted by the next prune run.

Note that there is the option `--instant-delete` which circumvents this two-phase deletion. Only use this
option, if you **REALLY KNOW** that there is no parallel access to your repo, else you risk losing data!

## You said "rustic uses less resources than restic" but I'm observing the opposite

In general rustic uses less resources, but there may be some exceptions. For instance the crypto libraries
of Rust and golang both have optimizations for some CPUs. But it might be that your CPU benefits from a
golang optimization which is not present in the Rust implementation.
If you observe some unexpected resource usage, please don't hesitate to submit an issue.

## How to install shell completions

All completion files are generated by invoking `rustic completions` command. So run:

### Bash

```sh
rustic completions bash > /etc/bash_completion.d/rustic.bash
```

### Fish

```sh
rustic completions fish > $HOME/.config/fish/completions/rustic.fish
```

### Zsh

ZSH completions are commonly stored in any directory listed in your `$fpath` variable. To use these completions,
write completions script (`_rustic`) to one of those directories, or add your own to this list.

This list includes, for example, these directories:

- `/usr/local/share/zsh/site-functions`
- `/usr/share/zsh/site-functions`

So you can run:

```sh
rustic completions zsh > /usr/local/share/zsh/site-functions/_rustic
```
